Add blog post about fearless_simd v0.6 (#144)
linebender/linebender.github.io: content/blog/2026-07-11-fearless-simd-0-6/index.md

+++
title = "fearless_simd v0.6 brings AVX-512 and ways to disable it"
authors = ["Shnatsel"]
+++

[`fearless_simd`](https://crates.io/crates/fearless_simd) takes `unsafe` out of SIMD.

No matter what level of abstraction you're after, be it autovectorization and multiversioning, portable SIMD, or safe access to raw intrinsics and nothing more, `fearless_simd` has you covered!

It features zero dependencies, from-scratch build time under 1 second, safe public APIs, and [very little](https://gist.github.com/Shnatsel/61fc294987a1e051ce3835c97dc0fc19) `unsafe` under the hood - orders of magnitude less than the alternatives!

The major addition in v0.6 is [AVX-512](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AVX-512) support for all operations, including support for safely invoking AVX-512 intrinsics via the [kernel!](https://docs.rs/fearless_simd/latest/fearless_simd/macro.kernel.html) macro.

## Why AVX-512

AVX-512 is rather poorly named.
It would be better to call it AVX3, because extending the vector width to 512 bits is the least interesting addition, and many implementations process 512-bit vectors on 256-bit execution units anyway.

> The real meat of AVX-512 is in the new instructions it brings, as well as in extending the number of registers for _all_ vector widths by 2x, or even more if you use masks.

Reviewer: Optional:

```suggestion
The real meat of AVX-512 is in the new instructions it brings, as well as in doubling the number of registers for _all_ vector widths, or even more if you use masks.
```

Would probably be cleaner English - I'm making the assumption that this means doubling rather than tripling (the text is ambiguous between those two possibilities).

> The real meat of AVX-512 is in the new instructions it brings, as well as in extending the number of registers for _all_ vector widths by 2x, or even more if you use masks.

Reviewer: Optional: A further alternative refinement would be:

```suggestion
The real meat of AVX-512 is in the features it adds across _all_ vector widths - not only new instructions but also a doubling of the number of registers.
For operations using masks, it adds still more registers.
```

So you can see significant performance gains from AVX-512 without ever touching 512-bit vectors.

AVX-512 has a bad rep due to the early implementations from Intel being quite poor.
[Intel Skylake](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skylake_(microarchitecture)) processors would [immediately reduce the frequencies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Vector_Extensions#Downclocking) of all CPU cores upon encountering a single AVX-512 instruction anywhere.
This usually hurts performance more than it helps.

The downclocking issue was fixed by Intel in [Ice Lake](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ice_Lake_(microprocessor)), and was never present on AMD.
Because of that `fearless_simd` **only enables AVX-512 on Ice Lake and later** on Intel.
Using Ice Lake as a baseline also gives us access to more instructions, enabling more efficient implementations of some operations.

> We've already seen a 15% end-to-end runtime improvement in [Vello CPU](https://github.com/linebender/vello/tree/main/sparse_strips/vello_cpu) from enabling AVX-512, on hardware without native 512-bit vectors, and without any code changes.

Reviewer: Is this as compared with AVX2? We probably should also specify exactly the target CPU.
That is, something like:

```suggestion
We've already seen a 15% end-to-end runtime improvement in [Vello CPU](https://github.com/linebender/vello/tree/main/sparse_strips/vello_cpu) just by changing from AVX-512 to AVX2.
This measurement was performed on an (AMD Zen 4 desktop CPU), which doesn't even have native 512-bit vectors, and didn't require any code changes.
```

Author: Done, how's this?

Author: I'm not a native English speaker so I appreciate the wording suggestions. I feel your version here is better than what I came up with.

It's also worth noting that if binary size is a concern, you should try setting [`codegen-units=1`](https://nnethercote.github.io/perf-book/build-configuration.html#codegen-units) or [`lto=true`](https://nnethercote.github.io/perf-book/build-configuration.html#link-time-optimization) in your Cargo.toml before resorting to disabling SIMD instruction sets.

### Why not Cargo features?

We have considered using Cargo features to control which instruction sets get compiled, but they turned out to be a poor fit.
Cargo features are a library-level switch, but the decision on which instruction sets are to be included should be made by whoever compiles the final binary, not the library authors.
(If you are a library author and you really want to get rid of a certain instruction set for parts of the code, you can still [opt out in code rather than config](https://github.com/linebender/fearless_simd/blob/3d10e36bae31987855e784de907de308803f90e5/fearless_simd/examples/disable_avx2_for_one_function.rs)).
Also, if any dependency anywhere in your tree enables a Cargo feature, you cannot get rid of it without forking and patching the dependency.

> But the `cfg` flags turned out to be the perfect fit.

Reviewer: Perhaps:

```suggestion
We instead use `cfg` flags, which turned out to be the perfect fit.
```

As these are otherwise introduced previously.
